# A Default Judgment Has Been Entered Against Me | Webb Law Group

_Source: https://www.webblawgroup.com/business-litigation/default-judgments/_

---

A default judgment has been entered against me
A civil lawsuit is supposed represent an opportunity for an aggrieved party to seek justice in a straightforward manner that provides a Defendant ample opportunity to make their case and present their defenses. Yet sometimes a civil Plaintiff can “win” a lawsuit by default, due to the Defendant’s lack of action. Sometimes this lack of action is due to that Defendant’s own failure, but often it occurs because Defendant simply had no knowledge that a suit was filed against them. In some situations, it is possible to set aside the default to avoid this unfavorable outcome.
What is a Default Judgement?
A default judgment is where a Plaintiff serves a summons and complaint on a Defendant, and after the Defendant fails to respond to the summons and complaint, the Plaintiffs asks the Court to enter a judgment in the Plaintiff’s favor.
How can you Overturn a Default Judgment?
Most of the grounds to overturn a default judgment are available for six months following the entry. Under California Code of Civil Procedure Section §473(b) a judgment may be overturned for surprise, mistake, or excusable neglect within a reasonable amount of time not to exceed six months after entry of judgment . Examples of surprise, mistake, or excusable neglect include disabling illnesses or reliance on an attorney that failed to take action. Simply forgetting to respond to the lawsuit, or failing to find an attorney in time to respond to the lawsuit, does not count as excusable neglect. If you become aware of a default judgment against you, be sure to contact an attorney immediately.