# California's Criminal "Fraud" Laws, Penalties & Defenses

_Source: https://www.shouselaw.com/ca/defense/fraud/_

---

commit an act that results in an
unfair or undeserved benefit
for yourself, and/or
cause
harm or loss to another person
.
Often referred to as white-collar crimes,
fraud offenses
can subject you to high fines, significant jail/prison sentences, and
asset forfeiture
. Many of these crimes carry specific penalties, while others are
prosecuted
as:
Many
California fraud crimes
are
wobblers
, which means that prosecutors may charge them as
misdemeanors
or
felonies
, depending on
the facts of the case, and
your criminal history.
Some fraud offenses are also
federal crimes
, which means that you could be prosecuted in both
state court and federal court
.
In addition to having criminal penalties such as fines and incarceration, a fraud conviction could cause your
professional license(s)
to be
suspended or revoked
. Plus if you are a
non-citizen
, you risk
deportation
since fraud is a
crime involving moral turpitude
.
Three common
legal defenses
that can get fraud charges
dismissed
include:
you did not have fraudulent intent,
you were the
victim of mistaken identity
, and/or
the police committed misconduct, such as
entrapment
or an illegal
search
.
Our
California criminal defense attorneys
1
have a long track record of getting
fraud charges
reduced or dismissed completely. Below we explain the
most common types of fraud offenses
:
If, after reading this article, you would like more information, we invite you to contact us at Shouse Law Group.
Generally speaking, you commit fraud anytime you commit an act that results in an unfair or undeserved benefit for yourself, and/or cause harm or loss to another person.
1. Insurance Fraud
You commit
insurance fraud
when you attempt to obtain insurance payments or benefits to which you are
not otherwise entitled
.
1.1. Automobile insurance fraud laws
You violate
California’s automobile insurance fraud laws (PC 548-551)
when you attempt to obtain money fraudulently from an
auto insurance carrier
by engaging in acts such as:
“staging” an accident,
inflating
the price of a claim, or
setting fire to your vehicle and reporting it stolen.
1.2. Health care insurance fraud laws
Doctors
, pharmacists, medical equipment suppliers and hospital employees are just some of the players that may be involved in violating
California’s health care insurance fraud laws
.
Examples
of these types of violations include (but are not limited to):
charging for medical services that were not provided,
receiving “
kickbacks
” for prescribing certain drugs,
altering medical records,
engaging in
doctor shopping or prescription fraud
by securing multiple prescriptions for the same drug, and/or
double billing
or over-billing for services rendered (“upcoding”).
1.3. Medi-Cal insurance fraud laws
Most acts that violate
California’s Medi-Cal insurance fraud laws
are simultaneously violations of
health care fraud
.
For example, a doctor who bills
Medi-Cal
(the state health insurance program for low-income
individuals) for services they did not perform commits
both Medi-Cal fraud
and the more general crime of healthcare
fraud.
It is also Medi-Cal fraud to
understate your income
in attempt to qualify for Medi-Cal benefits you are not entitled to.
1.4. Unemployment insurance fraud laws
California’s unemployment insurance fraud laws (WIC 10980)
prohibit
intentional attempts
to increase, reduce or deny an unemployment insurance benefit.
Examples
include (but are not limited to):
lying about being unemployed,
inflating your income and expenses in order to increase your benefits,
falsifying your work-search efforts,
collecting benefits in
two or more states
,
intentionally providing false information about why your employee was terminated – or about their wages – to avoid contributing to the unemployment insurance program.
1.5. Welfare fraud laws
You violate
California’s welfare fraud laws
(
10980 WIC
) when you try to
obtain or increase welfare benefits
to which you are not legally entitled. There are
two types
of welfare fraud:
recipient fraud
(which includes trying to secure fraudulent benefits), and
internal fraud
(where an employee of a government agency that distributes welfare benefits attempts to collect or distribute unlawful benefits from that agency, such as to a friend or family member).
1.6. Workers’ compensation laws
You violate
California’s workers’ compensation laws (CIC 1871.4)
when you try to make a
fraudulent claim
against this state’s workers’ compensation insurance program.
Examples
of this type of fraud include (but are not limited to):
faking an injury (or exaggerating the extent of the injury),
falsifying claim forms,
claiming that a
non-work injury
is work-related, and
failing to disclose a prior injury that would be relevant to your current claim.
1
Real estate and mortgage fraud laws punish any deliberate false representation that is made in connection with any portion of a real estate transaction.
2. Real Estate Fraud
California’s real estate and mortgage fraud laws
punish any
deliberate false representation
that is made in connection with any portion of a real estate transaction.
2.1. Foreclosure fraud
California foreclosure fraud (CC 2945.4)
is one of the most frequently prosecuted types of
real estate fraud
. In simple terms, foreclosure fraud takes place when a person – often a self-proclaimed foreclosure “consultant” – represents that they can
postpone or prevent a pending foreclosure
.
More generally, you commit this type of fraud anytime you engage in a
fraudulent activity
that has to do with:
a foreclosed home or
a home that is involved in the foreclosure process.
2.2. Laws against forging deeds
Forgery
is defined as knowingly altering, creating or using a written document with the intent to commit fraud. As a result,
California’s laws against forging deeds (PC 115)
prohibit
:
attempting to file, register or record a forged deed,
filing a forged deed, and/or
filing, registering, or recording any other false or forged document in any public office within the state
with the
intent
to fraudulently transfer title or obtain funds.
Forging a deed is a felony, carrying a prison term of 16 months to 3 years and fines of up to $10,000.
2.3. Predatory lending schemes
Predatory lending
refers to unlawful practices by banks and other lending institutions that take advantage of unsuspecting borrowers.
Simply put, you violate
California’s laws against predatory lending
when you – as a lender – manage a loan transaction to extract the maximum value for yourself
without regard
for the borrower’s ability to repay the loan.
2.4. Illegal property flipping
Property flipping
is generally a legal practice. It typically involves a buyer who:
purchases a property below market value,
upgrades it and then
quickly sells it for a profit.
Illegal property flipping in California
– a violation of
real estate and mortgage fraud laws
– occurs when you create fraudulent appraisals and/or loan documents to justify an inflated asking price.
2.5. Rent skimming laws
You violate
California’s rent skimming laws (CIV 890)
when you:
use rent proceeds from your residential rental property at any time during the first year after acquiring the property
without first applying that amount to your mortgage
, or
rent a property that you do not own or have the authority to rent and collect the rent for your own use.
Generally, rent skimming is a
civil offense,
subjecting you only to fines. However, if you engage in rent skimming with
five or more properties
within in any two-year period, the acts will be prosecuted criminally as well.
2.6. Straw buyer schemes
California straw buyer schemes
wreak havoc on”
straws
,” individuals who are recruited by real estate agents or brokers because of their
good credit
. The professional convinces the straw to use their information to secure a loan for another buyer – or even a fictitious buyer – who allegedly cannot acquire the loan because of
poor credit
.
Once the loan is processed, the agents – and any other players such as a mortgage broker –
collect the loan money and run
. The straw is then left responsible for the mortgage, which ultimately causes them
to declare
bankruptcy
and face possible criminal charges
.
2.7. Phantom help schemes
California phantom help schemes (CIV 2945.4)
are specifically
prohibited
under foreclosure fraud law. There are
three types
of phantom help schemes:
A so-called “foreclosure consultant” or “mortgage modification specialist” charges a homeowner who is facing foreclosure
a fee to delay or prevent the foreclosure process
when they in fact do little or no work towards this goal,
A seller markets a home that is
pending foreclosure
to an unsuspecting buyer who is unaware of the foreclosure. The “seller” collects a down payment and delivers a
fake or unrecorded deed
that does not convey any title to the property.
A “consultant” convinces the homeowner to make their
mortgage payments directly to the consultant
who claims that they will serve as a liaison between the homeowner and the bank in an effort to slow or stop the foreclosure process.
2
3. Financial Fraud
3.1. Check fraud
You commit
California check fraud (PC 476)
by making, using or possessing – or attempting to make or use – a
check
when you:
intend to defraud the payee, and
reveal that intent by representing the check to be genuine.
Check fraud
also comprises:
3.2. Credit card fraud
California credit card fraud (PC 484e – 484j)
, not surprisingly, involves any fraudulent transaction that is made or attempted with respect to a
credit or debit card
or with the account information that is linked to a credit or debit card.
Typical
examples
of this offense involve:
using someone else’s credit card without their authorization,
selling counterfeit credit cards, and/or
using your own credit/debit card knowing that the card is expired or has been revoked.
3.3. Securities fraud
California securities fraud
– also known as stock fraud or investment fraud – involves practices that encourage investors to make decisions based on
false information
. This type of fraud can include:
stealing from investors or a company,
misstating a company’s value, or
counterfeiting or altering a company’s financial statements.
Stock traders, promoters, accountants, and traders are the
typical players
that are involved in these types of schemes.
3
4. Forgery & Identity Theft
Forging
any type of document is a fraudulent offense. Because many forged documents have to do with one’s
identification
, these types of offenses not only violate state fraud laws but also forgery laws and
identity theft laws
as well.
4.1. Laws against forging, counterfeiting or possessing a fraudulent public seal
California’s laws against forging, counterfeiting or possessing a fraudulent public seal (PC 472)
prohibit just that.
What is interesting is that this crime is
not limited to California seals
: You can be convicted of this offense for engaging in any of the above activities with respect to
any public seal
, whether it is the seal of any:
government,
government agency or
corporation.
If you violate this law by forging a public seal on a document that lends you someone else’s identity, you violate
identity theft law
as well.
4.2. Laws against forging or counterfeiting a driver’s license or ID card
Similarly, if you violate
California’s laws against forging or counterfeiting a driver’s license or ID card (PC 470)
– and you assign yourself a different name – you would also be guilty of
identity theft
. However, it is not necessary that you commit
identity theft
in order to violate this law.
All that is required under this fraud offense is that you alter
any
government-issued driver’s license or ID card
or make a counterfeit one.
Note that merely
possessing a fake or counterfeit driver’s license or ID card (PC 470b)
is also
fraud
.
4.3. False impersonation law
You violate
California’s false impersonation law (PC 529)
when you
pose as another person
in order to secure a benefit for yourself and/or to harm the other individual. This is clear
identity theft
.
Common
examples
include:
signing someone else’s name to a check and trying to cash it as if you’re that individual, which is also check fraud, or
using someone else’s name to obtain welfare benefits, which is also a violation of welfare laws.
Oftentimes, this type of offense takes place over the
Internet
. Common
examples
include:
using someone else’s credit card to make an online purchase, or
posing as someone in an online “chatroom” or by hacking into someone else’s social networking profile.
Both of these examples are also examples of
Internet fraud
, discussed below.
4.4. Internet fraud
California’s Internet fraud laws
prohibit any
fraudulent activity that takes place on a computer
, such as in a chat-room, e-mail, or online store. Examples include:
making fraudulent online purchases,
creating or forwarding a computer virus, and/or
violating
cyberstalking laws
.
4
Many state fraud offenses that specifically deal with seniors.
5. Elder Abuse Fraud
5.1. Senior fraud
You violate
California’s elder abuse laws (PC 368)
when you emotionally, physically or financially
abuse an elder
(a person 65 years or older). When this type of abuse is
financial
, it typically qualifies as
senior fraud
.
Examples
of the types of schemes that frequently qualify as financial elder abuse include (but are not limited to):
telemarketing
schemes,
credit repair schemes,
home repair schemes,
funeral and cemetery senior fraud, and
real estate
predatory lendin
g elder abuse.
5.2. Nursing home fraud
Like elder abuse,
nursing home abuse
can be physical, emotional or financial. Instances of
financial abuse
are considered acts of
California nursing home fraud
. This
type of fraud
can include acts such as:
being an employee of the facility and convincing one of the elderly residents to sign over their property to the employee,
overbilling
for care/meds, and/or
forging the elder’s name on a check.
6. Other Fraud Types
6.1. Mail fraud
Mail fraud
is actually a
federal offense
. It includes any fraudulent activity that utilizes the
postal system
during the commission of the offense. This means that if, for example, you:
use the mail to advertise fraudulent services,
send a
forged check
through the mail, or
intentionally fail to deliver a product that was ordered through the mail,
you may be convicted of
mail fraud
.
6.2. Handicapped parking fraud
You commit
California handicapped parking fraud
when you illegally use, misuse or lend to another person a
disabled parking placard
. There are a variety of ways you can commit this
offense
, including (but not limited to):
using someone else’s placard to park when you are not disabled, and the true owner of the placard is not with you,
lending your placard to someone who is
not entitled
to use such a placard, or
displaying a fake, forged or expired handicapped placard.
6.3. Law against fraudulent vehicle registration stickers
If in an effort to secure a financial gain and/or to avoid paying DMV taxes or fees, you
intentionally interfere
with:
a license plate,
registration stickers, or
a registration card,
you are
guilty
of violating
California’s law against fraudulent registration stickers (VC 4463)
. Depending on how you interfere with these items, you could face additional charges for violating state law against forging, counterfeiting or possessing a
fraudulent public seal
.
6.4. Gambling fraud
Penal Code 332 PC prohibits fraudulently obtaining someone else’s
money or property
through card games, scams, sleight-of-hand or tricks, such as:
three card monte or other “confidence games”;
cheating at card games or other
gambling activities
; and
fraudulent fortune-telling.
California gaming fraud (PC 332)
is punished based on the
amount of money
you are alleged to have fraudulently obtained through such activities. This offense carries misdemeanor penalties for amounts of $950 or less–but becomes a wobbler for amounts
over $950
.
6.5. Telemarketing Fraud
Business & Professions Code 17511.9
makes it a crime to engage in so-called “
telemarketing fraud
.” This means to use the phone in attempt to defraud others out of their money through a
deceitful or fraudulent
business scheme.
Telemarketing fraud is a
wobbler
punishable by up to one year in jail as a misdemeanor, and up to 3 years in custody and up to $10,000 in fines as a felony.
6.6. Chargeback Fraud
This scheme (also called “
double dipping
“) typically involves:
purchasing a good with a credit or debit card,
lying
about never receiving it (or claiming it was damaged, etc.),
demanding a refund, and
keeping
the good (and sometimes reselling it).
Additional Resources
For more in-depth information, refer to these scholarly articles:
Legal References